containerized code only for remote mpi mapping hpc type (#5667)
aiidateam/aiida-core: docs/source/howto/run_containerized_codes.rst

.. _how-to:run-containerized_codes:

****************************************
How to setup and run containerized codes
****************************************

This how-to walks you through the steps of setting up a compute resource, setting up containerized codes on that computer, and submitting a calculation through AiiDA (with more details supplement to :ref:`introductory tutorial <tutorial:basic:calcjob>`).

.. important::

    Running code in the container usually require mapping the current directory (where the input files locate) to the working directory in the container.
    Current directory is specified in the job script as ``$PWD``.

>     The computer setup to run containerized code **MUST** set ``use_double_quotes`` to ``True`` to escape the command line parameters using double quotes.

Reviewer: Sure we can, it is an attribute on the `Computer` class.
```python
In [1]: c = load_computer('localhost')

In [2]: c.get_use_double_quotes()
Out[2]: False

In [3]: c.set_use_double_quotes(False)
```

>     The computer setup to run containerized code **MUST** set ``use_double_quotes`` to ``True`` to escape the command line parameters using double quotes.

Author: I see, thanks!

> There are two type of codes the ``installed`` and ``portable``, which are all supported to be run in the container.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two ways that a containerized code can be configured in AiiDA:

* The container, which already contains the code to be run, is pre-installed on a specific target computer (``installed``)
* The container provides an execution environment into which a particular code (executable and files) is copied before it is executed (``portable``)

These two types are referred to as ``installed`` and ``portable``, because an ``installed`` container is already installed on a target computer and so it will be tied to a specific :class:`~aiida.orm.computers.Computer` configured in AiiDA, whereas the ``portable`` code is not yet installed on any computer but can be retrieved from a container index (such as Docker Hub) and downloaded and run into any computer.
The ``portable`` code therefore does not require defining any particular :class:`~aiida.orm.computers.Computer` but can be sent to any configured computer when at calculation launch time.
These two concepts are implemented by the :class:`aiida.orm.nodes.data.code.containerized.InstalledContainerizedCode` and :class:`aiida.orm.nodes.data.code.containerized.PortableContainerizedCode` data plugins.
They are analogs to the plugins for non-containerized codes :ref:`InstalledCode <topics:data_types:core:code:installed>` and :ref:`PortableCode <topics:data_types:core:code:portable>`.

```

> We use `singularity`_ as the containerized technology in this section.
> Singularity is easy to install and designed to supported the scientific computiong in HPC workd.
> There are other similar containerized technologies for HPC such as `sarus`_ and `shifter`_ are supposed to be support by this feature.
> We have Sarus and Singularity tested to run with this containerized code setup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. note::

   For the purposes of this how-to guide, we will be using `singularity`_ as the containerizing technology.
   Singularity is easy to install and designed to support scientific computing on HPC compute resources.
   There are other similar containerizing technologies for HPC, such as `Sarus`_ and `Shifter`_ which are equally supported by the containerized code plugins, although only Sarus and Singularity have been explicitly tested.
```

Installed containerized code
============================

> 

Reviewer: We should add entries for the two new plugins to the table in `docs/source/topics/data_types.rst` below the `InstalledCode` and `PortableCode`.

Author: True, added. But the Markdown table is not well indented, do I need to do it by hand or is there an online tool for it?

Reviewer: I am afraid I also did it by hand. I am sure there must be a tool for it, but I think quickly adjusting manually is going to be faster than finding the tool and configuring it for this use case...

Reviewer: Restructured text really sucks for formatting like this

Author: No worries, I already did it by hand. Not to much pain.

> The typical code setup configure file for for running code installed singularity container is shown below.
> Assuming we want to run the `/bin/sh` provided from the inside the image [`docker://alpine`].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The :class:`aiida.orm.nodes.data.code.containerized.InstalledContainerizedCode` data plugin allows running a code inside a container that is available on a computer that is configured in AiiDA through the :class:`~aiida.orm.computers.Computer` class.
Consider the example where we have a container ``docker://alpine`` installed on the ``localhost`` computer, and we want to run the ``core.arithmetic.add`` calculation job plugin using the ``/bin/sh`` executable inside the container using ``Singularity``.
To configure this containerized code, create the following configuration file:
```

    .. code-block:: yaml

        ---
        label: add-singularity
        description: add executed on singularity
        default_calc_job_plugin: core.arithmetic.add
        computer: localhost
        filepath_executable: /bin/sh
        image_name: docker://alpine
        engine_command: singularity exec --bind $PWD:$PWD {image_name}
        prepend_text: ' '
        append_text: ' '

Create the code by executing:

.. code-block:: console

    $ verdi code create core.code.installed.containerized --config singularity-add.yaml

> Then this code can be used the same way as regular setup code.
> With the advantage that there is no need to explicitly install or compile the code on the remote machine.
> It requires the remote machine has Singularity installed (if not ask HPC administrator to do it) that the executable is in the container shipped with the image.
> For the first time running the containerized code, the image will pulled from dockerhub automatically, which may takes a while if the image is large.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The created code can then be used to run a calculation just like any other code:

.. code-block:: python

    from aiida.engine import run_get_node
    code = load_code('add-singularity')
    builder = code.get_builder()
    builder.x = Int(1)
    builder.y = Int(2)
    results, node = run_get_node(builder)

The big advantage over the non-containerized :class:`aiida.orm.nodes.data.code.containerized.InstalledContainerizedCode` equivalent is that with the containerized version there is no need to explicitly install or compile the code on the remote machine.
Note that this example requires Singularity to be installed on the target computer and that the ``filepath_executable`` is already part of the container image.

.. note::
    The first time that the containerized code is run, the image will be automatically pulled from Docker Hub, which may takes a while if the image is large.
```

Portable containerized code
===========================

> The portable containerized code is very useful for running scripts with certain dependencies required as environment.
> A typical example is if you have python scripts need to run with certain dependencies such as `numpy`, `scipy` etc.
> You want to make AiiDA able to wrapper those code without go to the remote system and configure python environment there.
> With this feature, there is no need to go to remote computer to build a enviroument install required dependencies for running the script, but just build a docker container an use it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The :class:`aiida.orm.nodes.data.code.containerized.PortableContainerizedCode` data plugin allows to provide a container image that provides a computing environment.
This is useful when you have a script that can be executed within that environment, as with the portable containerized code the script can then be deployed in the container on any computer that is configured within AiiDA (as long as that computer supports the containerization technology).

Typical example are Python scripts that require a Python environment with specific dependencies such as `numpy` and `scipy`.
With the ``PortableContainerizedCode``, you can simply configure the container to use and the script to run, and it can then be deployed on any ``Computer``.
```

> I use the example where the CalcJob run the python script that use numpy to calculate. The code config yaml file is:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here we consider the example of a Python script that uses ``numpy`` to perform a calculation (in this trivial example, multiply a number by two).
To configure this containerized code, create the following configuration file:
```

    .. code-block:: yaml

        ---
        label: numpy-double-portable
        description: "containerized portable code of numpy multiply by 2"
        default_calc_job_plugin: core.templatereplacer

>         filepath_executable: doubler.py

Reviewer: We should add the ``doubler.py` code to the docs maybe as an example and add a download link so people can easily download it.

        filepath_files: PLACEHOLDER_PORTABLE_PATH_DOUBLER
        image: docker://clearlinux/numpy-mp
        engine_command: singularity exec --bind $PWD:$PWD --env APPEND_PATH=$PWD {image}
        prepend_text: ' '
        append_text: ' '

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. note::

    The example ``doubler.py`` script can be :download:`downloaded here <include/scripts/doubler.py>`
```

> The ``APPEND_PATH=$PWD`` is needed otherwise the script not in the PATH.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. node::
   The ``APPEND_PATH=$PWD`` is required to make sure that the path of the script (specified by ``filepath_executable``) will be part of the ``PATH`` environment variable inside the container.
```

The `doubler.py`` can be any script with the corresponding `CalcJob`` and `Parser`.

> Here we have `doubler.py` below, which basiclly read the number from input file of the first command line argument, running process write the output to the output file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer: Think it is better to provide it as a download

        #!/usr/bin/env python
        # -*- coding: utf-8 -*-
        """Helper script for portable containerized code testing
        It read data from file and double value and print."""

        import sys

        import numpy as np

        def main():  # pylint: disable=missing-function-docstring
            inp_file = sys.argv[1]
            with open(inp_file, 'rb') as handle:
                inp = handle.read()
                inp = int(inp)
            res = np.multiply(2, inp)
            print(res)

        if __name__ == '__main__':
            main()

You can see we call use ``numpy`` in this script, and it need to be first installed to the python environment.
The image ``docker://clearlinux/numpy-mp`` of portable containerized code provides the python environment which has the parallelizable ``numpy`` installed in the and configured.

Running the portable containerized code is all the same as running portable code which you need to give the computer name (it can be any computer that has the singularity installed and running) in the calculation ``metadata``.
To run the code we configure above, the example is below:

    .. code-block:: python

>         from aiida import orm
>         from aiida.engine import run_get_node
>         from aiida.plugins import CalculationFactory
> 
> 
>         TemplatereplacerCalculation = CalculationFactory('core.templatereplacer')
>         x_base = 4
>         inputs = {
>             'code':
>             orm.load_code('numpy-double-portable'),
>             'metadata': {
>                 'computer': orm.load_computer('localhost'),  # any computer has singularity installed
>                 'options': {
>                     'resources': {
>                         'num_machines': 1,
>                         'tot_num_mpiprocs': 1
>                     }
>                 }
>             },
>             'template':
>             orm.Dict(
>                 dict={
>                     'input_file_template': '{x}',
>                     'input_file_name': 'input.txt',
>                     'cmdline_params': ['input.txt'],
>                     'output_file_name': 'output.txt',
>                 }
>             ),
>             'parameters':
>             orm.Dict(dict={
>                 'x': x_base,
>             }),
>         }
>         res, _ = run_get_node(TemplatereplacerCalculation, **inputs)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        from aiida import engine, orm
        from aiida.plugins import CalculationFactory

        TemplatereplacerCalculation = CalculationFactory('core.templatereplacer')
        inputs = {
            'code': orm.load_code('numpy-double-portable'),
            'metadata': {
                'computer': orm.load_computer('localhost'),  # any computer that has singularity installed
                'options': {
                    'resources': {
                        'num_machines': 1,
                        'tot_num_mpiprocs': 1
                    }
                }
            },
            'template': orm.Dict({
                'input_file_template': '{x}',
                'input_file_name': 'input.txt',
                'cmdline_params': ['input.txt'],
                'output_file_name': 'output.txt',
            }),
            'parameters': orm.Dict({
                'x': 4,
            }),
        }
        results = engine.run(TemplatereplacerCalculation, **inputs)
```

> The advantage is you can replace ``localhost`` in metadata computer field with any computer that has singularity installed, rather than log in and create/configure the python enviroument with ``numpy`` installed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The advantage of this containerized code type is that you can replace the ``metadata.computer`` input with any ``Computer`` configured in AiiDA that supports Singularity and run the calculation on a variety of compute resources by changing a single input.
```

.. _how-to:run-containerized_codes:

****************************************
How to setup and run containerized codes
****************************************

This how-to walks you through the steps of setting up a compute resource, setting up containerized codes on that computer, and submitting a calculation to run inside those containers through AiiDA (with more details supplement to :ref:`introductory tutorial <tutorial:basic:calcjob>`).

.. important::

    Running code in a container usually requires mapping the current directory (where the input files are located) to the working directory inside the container.
    The current directory is specified in the job script as ``$PWD``.
    The computer setup to run containerized code **MUST** set ``use_double_quotes`` to ``True`` to escape the command line parameters using double quotes.

>     The default are single quotes, but that will prevent the ``$PWD`` expression from being evaluated and instead will be treated as a string literal.

Reviewer 2: ok

The ``portable`` code therefore does not require defining any particular :class:`~aiida.orm.computers.Computer` but can be sent to any configured computer when at calculation launch time.
These two concepts are implemented by the :class:`aiida.orm.nodes.data.code.containerized.InstalledContainerizedCode` and :class:`aiida.orm.nodes.data.code.containerized.PortableContainerizedCode` data plugins.
They are analogs to the plugins for non-containerized codes :ref:`InstalledCode <topics:data_types:core:code:installed>` and :ref:`PortableCode <topics:data_types:core:code:portable>`.

.. note::

   For the purposes of this how-to guide, we will be using `Singularity <https://singularity-docs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`__ as the containerizing technology.
   Singularity is easy to install and designed to support scientific computing on HPC compute resources.

>    There are other similar containerizing technologies for HPC, such as `Sarus <https://sarus.readthedocs.io/en/stable/>`__ and `Shifter <https://github.com/NERSC/shifter>`__ which are equally supported by the containerized code plugins, although only Sarus and Singularity have been explicitly tested.

Reviewer 2: Let's mention enroot here as well https://github.com/NVIDIA/enroot/ (if singularity works I believe it will work as well).

Plus: although docker is not targeting HPC, it is the most popular container runtime by a mile, so we need to at least mention whether it is supported or not.

.. _how-to:run-containerized_codes:installed:

Installed containerized code
============================

> The :class:`aiida.orm.nodes.data.code.containerized.InstalledContainerizedCode` data plugin allows running a code inside a container that is available on a computer that is configured in AiiDA through the :class:`~aiida.orm.computers.Computer` class.

Reviewer 2: We will need a brief explanation of what "available" means here

 - Image URI for a container registry that is accessible from the computer
 - Image file on the file system of the computer

        default_calc_job_plugin: core.arithmetic.add
        computer: localhost
        filepath_executable: /bin/sh
        image_name: docker://alpine
        engine_command: singularity exec --bind $PWD:$PWD {image_name}
        prepend_text: ' '
        append_text: ' '

Create the code by executing:

.. code-block:: console

    $ verdi code create core.code.installed.containerized --config singularity-add.yaml

The created code can then be used to run a calculation just like any other code:

.. code-block:: python

    from aiida.engine import run_get_node
    code = load_code('add-singularity@localhost')
    builder = code.get_builder()
    builder.x = Int(1)
    builder.y = Int(2)
    results, node = run_get_node(builder)

The big advantage over the non-containerized :class:`aiida.orm.nodes.data.code.containerized.InstalledContainerizedCode` equivalent is that with the containerized version there is no need to explicitly install or compile the code on the remote machine.
Note that this example requires Singularity to be installed on the target computer and that the ``filepath_executable`` is already part of the container image.

.. note::

>     The first time that the containerized code is run, the image will be automatically pulled from Docker Hub, which may takes a while if the image is large.

Reviewer 2: Although this may seem trivial, this is very important information and needs to be mentioned early
